dares me to personal combat, Caesar to Antony.
Let the old ruffian know I have many other ways to die,
meantime laugh at his challenge.
Caesar must think,
when one so great begins to rage,
he's hunted even to falling.
Give him no breath but now make boot of his distraction.
Never anger made good guard for itself.
Let our best heads know that tomorrow
the last of many battles we mean to fight.
Within our files there are of those
that served Mark Antony but lateó
enough to fetch him in.
See it done.
And feast the army.
We have store to do it, and they have earned the waste.
Poor Antony.
He will not fight with me, Domitius.
No.
And why should he not?
He thinks being 20 times of better fortune,
he is 20 men to 1.
Tomorrow, soldier, by sea and land I'll fight,
or I will live or bathe my dying honor
in the blood shall make it live again.
Will thou fight well?
I'll strike and cry, "Take all."
Well said; come on.
Call forth my household servants.
Let's tonight be bounteous at our meal.
Oh, give me thy hand.
Thou hast been rightly honest.
So hast thou.
Thou and thou and thou.
You have served me well,
and kings have been your fellows.
What means this?
'Tis one of those odd tricks
which sorrow shoots out of the mind.
And thou art honest too.
I wish I could be made so many men,
and all of you clapped up together in an Antony
that I might do you service so good as you have done.
The gods forbid.
Well..
Well, my good fellows, wait on me tonight.
Scant not my cups and make as much of me
as when mine empire was your fellow too
and suffered my command.
What does he mean?
To make his followers weep.
Tend me tonight.
May be it is the period of your duty.
Haply you shall not see me moreó
or if, a mangled shadow.
Perchance tomorrow you'll serve another master.
I look on you as one that takes his leave.
Mine honest friends, I turn you not away.
But like a master married to your good service,
stay till death.
Tend me tonight two hours, I ask no more.
And the gods yield you for it.
What mean you, sir, to give them this discomfort?
Look, they weep.
And I, an ass, am onion-eyed.
For shame, transform us not to women.
Ho, ho, ho!
Now the witch take me if I meant it thus!
Oh.
Grace grow where those drops fall!
My hearty friends, you take me in too dolorous a sense.
For I spake to you for your comfort,
did desire you to burn this night with torches.
Know, my hearts, I hope well of tomorrow
and will lead you where rather I'll expect victorious life
than death and honor.
Let's to supper, come, and drown consideration.
Eros! Mine armor, Eros!
Sleep a little.
No, my chuck.
Eros, come; mine armor, Eros!
Come good fellow, put mine iron on.
If fortune be not ours today,
it is because we brave her; come.
Nay, I'll help too.
What's this for?
Ah, let be, let be!
Thou art the armorer of my heart.
False, false; this, this.
Sooth, la, I'll help, thus it must be.
Well, well, we shall thrive now.
Seest thou, my good fellow?
Go put on thy defences.
Briefly, sir.
Is not this buckled well?
Rarely, rarely.
He that unbuckles this till we do please
to daff it for our repose shall hear a storm.
Thou fumblest, Eros.
My queen's a squire more tight at this than thou.
Dispatch.
O love, that thou could see my wars today
and knew'st the royal occupation,
thou should see a workman in it.
The morn is fair. Good morrow, general.
This morning, like the spirit of a youth
that means to be of note, begins betimes.
So, so; come, give me that.
Oh, oh, this way.
Fare thee well, dame.
Whatever becomes of me, this is a soldier's kiss.
He goes forth gallantly.
That he and Caesar might determine this great war
in single fight, then Antonyó
But nowó Well, on.
The gods make this a happy day to Antony.
Would thou and those thy scars had once prevailed
to make me fight at land.
Hadst thou done so, the kings that have revolted
and the soldier that has this morning left thee
would have still have followed your heels.
Who's gone this morning?
Who?
One ever near thee.
Call for Enobarbus, he shall not hear thee
or from Caesar's camp, say, "I am none of thine."
What say'st thou?
Sir, he is with Caesar.
Sir, his chests and treasure he has not with him.
Is he gone?
Most certain.
Go, Eros; send his treasure after.
Do it.
Detain no jot, I charge thee.
Write to him.
I will subscribe gentle adieus and greetings,
say that I wish he never find more cause to change a master.
O my fortunes have corrupted honest men!
Dispatch.
Enobarbus!
Go forth, Agrippa, and begin the fight.
Our will is Antony be took alive.
Make it so known.
Caesar, I shall.
The time of universal peace is near.
Prove this a prosperous day,
the three-nooked world shall bear the olive freely.
Antony is come into the field.
Go charge Agrippa.
Plant those that have revolted in the van,
that Antony may seem to spend his fury upon himself.
Enobarbus, Antony hath after thee
sent all thy treasure with his bounty overplus.
I give it you.
Mock not, Enobarbus.I tell you true.
Best you safed the bringer out of the host.
I must attend mine office or would have done it myself.
Your emperor continues still a Jove.
I am alone the villain of the earth,
and feel I am so most.
O Antony, thou mine of bounty,
how wouldst thou have paid my better service
when my turpitude thou dost so crown with gold.
This blows my heart.
If swift thought break it not,
a swifter mean shall outstrike thought.
But thought will do it, I feel.
I fight against thee.
No, I will go seek some ditch wherein to die.
The foulest best fits my latter part of life.
We have beat him to his camp!
Run one before!
Let the queen know of our gests.
Tomorrow before the sun shall see us,
we'll spill the blood that has today escaped.
Oh, I thank you all, for doughty-handed are you
and have fought not as you served the cause
but as it had been each man's like mine.
You have shown all Hectors.
Enter the city, clip our wives, your friends.
Tell them your feats whilst they with joyful tears
wash the congealment from your wounds
and kiss the honored gashes whole.
Lord of lords.
O infinite virtue,
comest thou smiling from the world's great snare uncaught?
My nightingale, we have beat them to their beds.
Behold this man.
Commend unto his lips thy favoring hand.
Kiss it, my warrior!
He hath fought today as if a god in hate of mankind
had destroyed in such a shape.
I'll give thee, friend, an armor all of gold.
It was a king's.
He has deserved it,
were it carbuncled like holy Phoebus' car.
Give me thy hand.
Through Alexandria make a jolly march.
Bear our hacked targets like the men that owe them.
Had our great palace the capacity to camp this host?
We all would sup together and drink carouses
to the next day's fate which promises royal peril.
Trumpeters,
with brazen din blast you the city's ear.
Make mingle with rattling tambourines,
that heaven and earth may strike their sounds together,
applauding our approach.
O, bear me witness, night.
Be witness to me, O thou blessed moon,
when men revolted shall upon record bear hateful memory,
poor Enobarbus did before thy face repent.
O sovereign mistress of true melancholy,
the poisonous damp of night disponge upon me,
that life, a very rebel to my will,
may hang no longer on me.
Throw my heart against the flint and hardness of my fault,
which, being dried with grief, will break to powder
and finish all foul thoughts.
O Antony, nobler than my revolt is infamous,
forgive me in thine own particular,
but let the world rank me in register
a master-leaver and a fugitive.
O Antony!
Their preparation is today by sea.
We please them not by land.
For both, my lord.
I would they fight in the fire or in the air;
we'd fight there too.
But thus it is.
Our foot upon the hills adjoining to the city
shall stay with us.
Order for sea is given.
They've put forth the haven,
where their appointment we may best discover
and look on their endeavour.
But being charged, we will be still by land,
which, as I take it, we shall,
for his best force is forth to man his galleys.
To the vales and hold our best advantage.
This foul Egyptian hath betrayed me.
My fleet hath yielded to the foe,
and yonder they cast their caps up and carouse together
like friends long lost.
Triple-turned whore!
'Tis thou hast sold me to this novice!
And my heart makes only wars on thee.
Bid them all fly,
for when I am revenged upon my charm, I have done all.
Bid them all fly; begone!
O sun, thy uprise shall I see no more.
Fortune and Antony part here.
Even here do we shake hands.
All come to this?
The hearts that spanieled me at heels,
to whom I gave their wishes, do discandy,
melt their sweets on blossoming Caesar.
And this pine is barked that overtopped them all.
Betrayed I am.
O this false soul of Egypt!
This grave charm whose eye becked forth my wars
and called them home,
whose bosom was my crownet, my chief endó
like a right gypsy hath at fast and loose
beguiled me to the very heart of loss.
What, Eros! Eros!
Ah, thou spell! Avaunt!
Why is my lord enraged against his love?
Vanish or I shall give thee thy deserving
and blemish Caesar's triumph.
Let him take thee
and hoist thee up to the shouting plebeians,
follow his chariot
like the greatest spot of all thy sex.
Oh, most monster-like be shown
for poorest diminutives for doits;
and let patient Octavia plow thy visage up
with her prepared nails.
'Tis well thou art gone.
If it be well to live,
but better 'twere thou fell'st into my fury,
for one death might have prevented many.
The witch shall die
to the young Roman boy she hath sold me,
and I fall under this plot.
She dies for it.
Help me, my women!
O, he is more mad than Telamon for his shield.
The boar of Thessaly was never so embossed.
To the monument.
There, lock yourself and send him word you are dead.
The soul and body rive not more in parting
than greatness going off.
To the monument.
Mardian, go tell him I have slain myself.
Say that the last I spoke was "Antony,"
and word it prithee piteously.
Hence, Mardian, and bring me how he takes my death.
To the monument!
Eros, thou yet behold'st me?
Ay, noble lord.
Sometimes we see a cloud that's dragonish,
a vapor sometime like a bear or lion,
a towered citadel, a pendent rock,
a forked mountain or blue promontory with trees upon it,
that nod unto the world and mock our eyes with air.
Thou hast seen these signs.
They are black vesper's pageants.
Ay, my lord.
That which is now a horse, even with a thought,
the rack dislimns and makes it indistinct
as water is in water.
It does, my lord.
My good knave Eros,
now thy captain is even such a body.
Here I am Antony,
yet cannot hold this visible shape.
My knave, I made these wars for Egypt.
And the queenó
whose heart I thought I had, for she had mine,
which whilst it was mine had annexed unto it a million more,
now lost.
She, Eros, has packed cards with Caesar
and false-played my glory unto an enemy's triumph.
Nay, weep not, gentle Eros.
There is left us ourselves to end ourselves.
O! Thy vile lady!
She has robbed me of my sword.
No, Antony.
My mistress loved thee,
and her fortunes mingled with thine entirely.
Hence, saucy eunuch; peace!
She hath betrayed me and shall die the death.
Death of one person can be paid but once,
and that she has discharged.
What thou wouldst do is done unto thy hand.
The last she spoke was, "Antony! Most noble Antony!"
Then in the midst,
a tearing groan did break the name of Antony.
It was divided between her heart and lips.
She rendered life thy name so buried in her.
Dead, then?
Dead.
Unarm, Eros.
The long day's task is done, and we must sleep.
Off, pluck off.
The seven-fold shield of Ajax
cannot keep the battery from my heart.
O, cleave, my sides!
Heart, once be stronger than thy continent,
crack thy frail case!
Apace, Eros, apace.
No more a soldier; bruised pieces, go.
You have been nobly borne.
From me awhile.
I will overtake thee, Cleopatra,
and weep for my pardon.
So it must be, for now all length is torture.
Since the torch is out, lie down and stray no farther.
Now all labor Mars what it does.
Yea, very force entangles itself with strength.
Seal then, and all is done.
Eros!
I come, my queen.
Stay for me.
Where souls do couch on flowers,
we'll hand-in-hand
and with our sprightly port make the ghosts gaze.
Dido and her Aeneas shall want troops,
and all the haunt be ours.
Come, Eros, Eros!
What would my lord?
Since Cleopatra died, I have lived in such dishonor
that the gods detest my baseness.
I, that with my sword quartered the world
and over green Neptune's back with ships made cities,
condemn myself to lack the courage of a woman.
Less noble mind than she which by her death
our Caesar tells "I am conqueror of myself."
Thou art sworn, Eros,
that when the exigent should come,
which now is come indeed,
when I should see behind me
the inevitable prosecution of disgrace and horror,
that on my command, thou then wouldst kill me.
Do it; the time is come.
Thou strikest not me, 'tis Caesar thou defeat'st.
Put color in thy cheek.
The gods withhold me!
Shall I do that which all the Parthian darts,
though enemy lost aim and could not?
Eros.
Wouldst thou be windowed in great Rome
and see thy master thus with pleached arms,
bending down his corrigible neck,
his face subdued to penetrative shame
whilst the wheeled seat of fortunate Caesar
drawn before him,
branded his baseness that ensued?
I would not see it.
Come, then; for with a wound I must be cured.
Draw that thy honest sword,
which thou hast worn most useful for thy country.
O, sir, pardon me!
When I did make thee free,
sworest thou not then to do this when I bade thee?
Do it at once, or thy precedent services
are all but accidents unpurposed.
Draw and come.
Turn from me then, that noble countenance,
wherein the worship of the whole world lies.
Lo thee!
My sword is drawn.
Then let it do at once the thing why thou hast drawn it!
My dear master, my captain, and my emperor,
let me say, before I strike this bloody stroke, farewell.
'Tis said, man; and farewell.
Farewell, great chief.
Shall I strike now?
Now, Eros.
Why, there then!
Thus do I escape the sorrow of Antony's death.
Thrice nobler than myself!
Thou teachest me, O valiant Eros,
what I should and thou couldst not.
My queen and Eros have got upon me a nobleness in record,
but I will be a bridegroom in my death
and run into it as to a lover's bed.
Come then.
And, Eros, thy master dies thy scholar.
To do thus, I learned of thee.
How nowónot dead? Not dead?
The guard, ho!
O, dispatch me!
What's the noise?
I have done my work in, friends.
Make an end of what I have begun.
The star is fallen.
And time is at his period.
Alas, and woe!
Let him that loves me strike me dead.
Not I.
Nor I.
Nor anyone.
Where's Antony?
There, Alexas, there.
Lives he?
Will thou not answer, man?
Art thou there, Alexas?
Draw thy sword and give me sufficing strokes for death.
Most absolute lord,
my mistress Cleopatra sent me to thee.
When did she send thee?
Now, my lord.
Where is she?
Locked in her monument.
She had a prophesying fear of what hath come to pass.
For when she sawó
which never shall be foundó
you did suspect she had disposed with Caesar
and that your rage would not be purged,
she sent you word she was dead.
But fearing since how it might work,
hath sent me to proclaim the truth.
And I am come, I dread, too late.
Too late, good Alexas.
Bear me, good friends, where Cleopatra bides.
It is the last service that I shall command you.
I have led you oft.
Carry me now, good friends, and have my thanks for all.
O Charmian, I will never go from hence.
Be comforted, dear madam.
No, I will not.
All strange and terrible events are welcome,
but comforts we despise.
Our size of sorrow proportioned to our cause
must be as great as that which makes it.
How now!
Is he dead?
His death's upon him but not dead.
His guard have brought him hither.
O sun, burn the great sphere thou movest in.
Darkling stand the varying shore of the world.
O Antony.
Antony, Antony!
Help, Charmian, help.
Iras, help.
Help, friends below.
Let's draw him hither.
Peace.
Not Caesar's valor hath overthrown Antony,
but Antony's hath triumphed on itself.
So it should be that none but Antony should conquer Antony.
But woe 'tis so!
I am dying, Egypt, dying.
Only I here importune death awhile
until of many thousand kisses
the poor last I lay upon thy lips.
I dare not, dear.
Dear my lord, pardon,
I dare not, lest I be taken.
Not the imperious show of the full-fortuned Caesar
ever shall be broached with me.
If knife, drugs, serpents have edge, sting, or operation,
I am safe.
Your wife Octavia,
with her modest eyes and still conclusion,
shall acquire no honor demuring upon demurringe.
Come, come, Antony.
Help me, my women.
We must draw thee up.
Assist, good friends.
O, quick or I am gone.
Here's sport indeed!
How heavy weighs my lord.
Our strength is all gone into heaviness
that makes the weight.
Had I great Juno's power,
the strong-winged Mercury should fetch thee up
and set thee by Jove's side.
Yet come a little.
Wishes were ever fools.
O, come, come, come.
And welcome, welcome!
Die where thou hast lived.
Quicken with kissing.
Had my lips that power, thus would I wear them out.
A heavy sight!
I am dying, Egypt, dying.
Give me some wine, and let me speak a little.
No, let me speak.
And let me rail so high
that the false housewife Fortune break her wheel,
provoked by my offence.
One word, sweet queen.
Of Caesar, seek your honor with your safety.
They do not go together.
Gentle, hear me.
None about Caesar trust but Proculeius.
My resolution and my hands I'll trust.
None about Caesar.
The miserable change now at my end.
Lament nor sorrow at,
but please thy thoughts in feeding them
with those my former fortunes
wherein I lived the greatest prince of the whole world,
the noblest and do now not basely die,
not cowardly put off my helmet to my countrymanó
a Roman by a Romanó valiantly vanquished.
Now my spirit is going.
I can no more.
Noblest of men, woo't die?
Hast thou no care of me?
Shall I abide in this dull world,
which in thy absence is no better than a sty?
O, see, my women.
The crown of the earth doth melt.
My lord!
O, withered is the garland of the war!
The soldier's pole is fallen.
Young boys and girls are level now with men.
The odds is gone,
and there is nothing left remarkable
beneath the visiting moon.
O, quietness, lady!
She's dead too, our sovereign.
Lady!
Madam!
O madam, madam, madam!
Royal Egypt Empress!
Peace, peace, Iras!
No more but even a woman
and commanded by such poor passion
as the maid that milks and does the meanest chares.
It were for me to throw my scepter at the injurious gods,
to tell them that this world did equal theirs
till they had stolen our jewel.
All's but naught.
Patience is sottish,
and impatience does become a dog that's mad.
Then is it sin to rush into the secret house of death?
Ere death dare come to us?
How do you, women?
What, what! Good cheer!
Why, how now, Charmian!
My noble girls!
Ah, women, women, look, our lamp is spent.
It's out.
Good sirs, take heart.
We'll bury him.
And then what's brave, what's noble,
let's do it after the high Roman fashion
and make death proud to take us.
Come. Away.
This case of that huge spirit now is cold.
Ah, women, women!
Come.
We have no friend but resolution
and the briefest end.